README.md, before:

<img src="images/radar_datatree.png" alt="thumbnail" width="550"/>

# FAIR open radar data
[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/658848435.svg)](https://zenodo.org/doi/10.5281/zenodo.10069535)
[![GitHub Release](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/aladinor/raw2zarr?display_name=tag&sort=semver)](https://github.com/aladinor/raw2zarr/releases/latest)
[![Binder](https://mybinder.org/badge_logo.svg)](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/aladinor/raw2zarr/main)

## Motivation

Radars are vital in meteorology, detecting severe weather early and enabling timely warnings, saving lives,
and reducing property damage. Beyond forecasting, radar data supports various applications,
including for statistical analysis and climatology, relying on time series analysis. Radar scans generate large,
separated files, leading to vast accumulations over decades, posing storage challenges akin to big data management.
A radar volume scan, comprising data collected through multiple cone-like sweeps at various elevation angles,
often exceeds several megabytes in size every 5 to 10 minutes that usually stored as individual files.
Consequently, national weather radar networks accumulate vast amounts of data with non-interconnected files over
extended periods, spanning several decades. This presents significant challenges in data storage and availability,
particularly when treating radar data as a time-series dataset, which parallels the complexities of managing big data.

Traditionally, radar data storage involves proprietary formats that demand extensive input-output (I/O) operations,
leading to prolonged computation times and high hardware requirements. In response, our study introduces a novel d
ata model designed to address these challenges. Leveraging the Climate and Forecast Conventions (CF) format-based
[FM301](https://community.wmo.int/en/activity-areas/wis/wmo-cf-extensions) hierarchical tree structure,
endorsed by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), and Analysis-Ready Cloud-Optimized
(ARCO; Abernathey et al. 2023) formats, we developed an open data model to arrange, manage, and store radar data in
cloud-storage buckets efficiently. This approach uses a suite of Python libraries, including Xarray (Xarray-Datatree),
Xradar, Wradlib, and Zarr, to implement a `hierarchical` `tree-like` data model. This model is designed to align
with the new open data paradigm, emphasizing the FAIR principles (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable).


## Authors

[Alfonso Ladino-Rincon](https://github.com/aladinor),
[Max Grover](https://github.com/mgrover1)

### Collaborators

<a href="https://github.com/aladinor/raw2zarr/graphs/contributors">
  <img src="https://contrib.rocks/image?repo=aladinor/raw2zarr" />
</a>


> [!WARNING]
> **This project is currently in high development mode.**
> Features may change frequently, and some parts of the library may be incomplete or subject to change. Please proceed with caution.

> [!CAUTION]
> **Critical Storage Requirements Warning**
> Processing radar data creates massive storage requirements. Based on real-world experience:
> - **1 month of data ≈ 800GB** of Zarr output storage
> - **1 year of data ≈ 10TB+** of storage required
> - Processing periods longer than hours can quickly exhaust available storage
>
> **Recommendations:**
> - Limit initial testing to **hourly datasets** to understand storage impact
> - Plan storage capacity carefully before production deployments
> - Consider cloud storage costs for large-scale processing
> - Monitor disk usage closely during processing


### Running on Your Own Machine
If you are interested in running this material locally on your computer, you will need to follow this workflow:

1. Clone the ["raw2zarr"](https://github.com/aladinor/raw2zarr) repository
    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/aladinor/raw2zarr.git
    ```

2. Move into the `raw2zarr` directory
    ```bash
    cd raw2zarr
    ```

3. Create and activate your conda environment from the `environment.yml` file
    ```bash
    conda env create -f environment.yml
    conda activate raw2zarr
    ```

4.  Move into the `notebooks` directory and start up Jupyterlab
    ```bash
    cd notebooks/
    jupyter lab
    ```

## Processing Modes

The library supports two processing modes for converting radar data to Zarr format:

### Sequential Processing (No Cluster Required)

For small datasets, testing, and development:

```python
from raw2zarr.builder.convert import convert_files
from raw2zarr.builder.builder_utils import get_icechunk_repo

# Create repository
repo = get_icechunk_repo("output.zarr")

# Sequential processing
convert_files(
    radar_files=files,
    append_dim="vcp_time",
    repo=repo,
    process_mode="sequential",  # No cluster needed
    engine="nexradlevel2"
)
```

### Parallel Processing (Cluster Required)

For large datasets and production use:

```python
from dask.distributed import LocalCluster
from raw2zarr.builder.convert import convert_files
from raw2zarr.builder.builder_utils import get_icechunk_repo

# Create repository and cluster
repo = get_icechunk_repo("output.zarr")
cluster = LocalCluster(n_workers=4, memory_limit="10GB")

try:
    convert_files(
        radar_files=files,
        append_dim="vcp_time",
        repo=repo,
        process_mode="parallel",
        cluster=cluster,  # Required for parallel mode
        engine="nexradlevel2"
    )
finally:
    cluster.close()
```
## References
* R. P. Abernathey et al., "Cloud-Native Repositories for Big Scientific Data," in Computing in Science & Engineering, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 26-35, 1 March-April 2021, doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2021.3059437.

Commit message:

docs: convert README admonitions to MyST and add NEXRAD dynamic scans warning

README.md, after:

<img src="images/radar_datatree.png" alt="thumbnail" width="550"/>

# FAIR open radar data
[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/658848435.svg)](https://zenodo.org/doi/10.5281/zenodo.10069535)
[![GitHub Release](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/aladinor/raw2zarr?display_name=tag&sort=semver)](https://github.com/aladinor/raw2zarr/releases/latest)
[![Binder](https://mybinder.org/badge_logo.svg)](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/aladinor/raw2zarr/main)

## Motivation

Radars are vital in meteorology, detecting severe weather early and enabling timely warnings, saving lives,
and reducing property damage. Beyond forecasting, radar data supports various applications,
including for statistical analysis and climatology, relying on time series analysis. Radar scans generate large,
separated files, leading to vast accumulations over decades, posing storage challenges akin to big data management.
A radar volume scan, comprising data collected through multiple cone-like sweeps at various elevation angles,
often exceeds several megabytes in size every 5 to 10 minutes that usually stored as individual files.
Consequently, national weather radar networks accumulate vast amounts of data with non-interconnected files over
extended periods, spanning several decades. This presents significant challenges in data storage and availability,
particularly when treating radar data as a time-series dataset, which parallels the complexities of managing big data.

Traditionally, radar data storage involves proprietary formats that demand extensive input-output (I/O) operations,
leading to prolonged computation times and high hardware requirements. In response, our study introduces a novel d
ata model designed to address these challenges. Leveraging the Climate and Forecast Conventions (CF) format-based
[FM301](https://community.wmo.int/en/activity-areas/wis/wmo-cf-extensions) hierarchical tree structure,
endorsed by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), and Analysis-Ready Cloud-Optimized
(ARCO; Abernathey et al. 2023) formats, we developed an open data model to arrange, manage, and store radar data in
cloud-storage buckets efficiently. This approach uses a suite of Python libraries, including Xarray (Xarray-Datatree),
Xradar, Wradlib, and Zarr, to implement a `hierarchical` `tree-like` data model. This model is designed to align
with the new open data paradigm, emphasizing the FAIR principles (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable).


## Authors

[Alfonso Ladino-Rincon](https://github.com/aladinor),
[Max Grover](https://github.com/mgrover1)

### Collaborators

<a href="https://github.com/aladinor/raw2zarr/graphs/contributors">
  <img src="https://contrib.rocks/image?repo=aladinor/raw2zarr" />
</a>


```{warning}
This project is currently in high development mode.

Features may change frequently, and some parts of the library may be incomplete or subject to change.
Proceed with caution.
```

```{caution}
Critical storage requirements

Processing radar data can create massive storage requirements. Based on real-world experience:
- 1 month of data ≈ 800 GB of Zarr output
- 1 year of data ≈ 10+ TB of storage
- Processing for long periods can exhaust storage quickly

Recommendations:
- Start with hourly datasets to understand the storage footprint
- Plan storage capacity before production deployments
- Consider cloud storage costs for large-scale processing
- Monitor disk usage during runs
```

```{warning}
NEXRAD dynamic scans not supported

RAW2zarr does not yet handle dynamic scan strategies in NEXRAD (e.g., SAILS, MRLE, AVSET).
Datasets acquired circa 2014 and later that use these modes will likely fail during conversion.
Until support is added, use pre‑2014 datasets or volumes known to use static VCPs.
```


### Running on Your Own Machine
If you are interested in running this material locally on your computer, you will need to follow this workflow:

1. Clone the ["raw2zarr"](https://github.com/aladinor/raw2zarr) repository
    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/aladinor/raw2zarr.git
    ```

2. Move into the `raw2zarr` directory
    ```bash
    cd raw2zarr
    ```

3. Create and activate your conda environment from the `environment.yml` file
    ```bash
    conda env create -f environment.yml
    conda activate raw2zarr
    ```

4.  Move into the `notebooks` directory and start up Jupyterlab
    ```bash
    cd notebooks/
    jupyter lab
    ```

## Processing Modes

The library supports two processing modes for converting radar data to Zarr format:

### Sequential Processing (No Cluster Required)

For small datasets, testing, and development:

```python
from raw2zarr.builder.convert import convert_files
from raw2zarr.builder.builder_utils import get_icechunk_repo

# Create repository
repo = get_icechunk_repo("output.zarr")

# Sequential processing
convert_files(
    radar_files=files,
    append_dim="vcp_time",
    repo=repo,
    process_mode="sequential",  # No cluster needed
    engine="nexradlevel2"
)
```

### Parallel Processing (Cluster Required)

For large datasets and production use:

```python
from dask.distributed import LocalCluster
from raw2zarr.builder.convert import convert_files
from raw2zarr.builder.builder_utils import get_icechunk_repo

# Create repository and cluster
repo = get_icechunk_repo("output.zarr")
cluster = LocalCluster(n_workers=4, memory_limit="10GB")

try:
    convert_files(
        radar_files=files,
        append_dim="vcp_time",
        repo=repo,
        process_mode="parallel",
        cluster=cluster,  # Required for parallel mode
        engine="nexradlevel2"
    )
finally:
    cluster.close()
```
## References
* R. P. Abernathey et al., "Cloud-Native Repositories for Big Scientific Data," in Computing in Science & Engineering, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 26-35, 1 March-April 2021, doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2021.3059437.
